# Starting a Shift

Ensure you are physically and mentally prepared to carry out your duties before you arrive at your job site. This means you should make sure you have had proper rest, that you are feeling well, and that you have cleared your mind of non-work related distractions; staying focused and safe on the job will help ensure you are able to deal with life outside of work when your shift is done. Check that your uniform is clean and neat and that you have the appropriate and authorized equipment. Make sure you have your notebook and a pen, and test that your radio (if you use one) or cell phone is charged and in working order.

rr

The post orders you learned about above provide a way to transfer information amongst personnel in a consistent and organized manner; start by reviewing the orders with the individual whom you are relieving. Ask if there were any incidents in the previous shift or whether or not there is anything specific to be watching for (e.g., inclement weather which may lead to flooding in a particular area of the site or a broken window lock for which a repair order has been placed, but not yet completed). The outgoing guard may advise you of personnel changes, for example, when someone has gone home sick, or when a new employee has been posted to the site.

Once you have clarified the expectations for your shift, you should plan your course of action. Note the frequency of patrols (if required) and determine when you will conduct each one. Plan your route for each patrol, making a mental list of the items you will check on each. It is not necessarily the best practice to use the same route/order for each patrol; changing up your routine makes your actions less predictable to potential intruders. Familiarize yourself with the site by using a map or by walking around (where permitted by your post order); determine where exits are located and note possible escape routes in case of a fire or other emergency. In a building where elevators are in use make sure you locate the stairs, which can be used as an alternate route to exit the premises. If you are new to a site, you should arrange a tour prior to beginning your first shift. It may be possible to accompany another security professional on their patrol during the shift prior to your own. Be sure to arrange this ahead of time so as not to leave a post or site unprotected.

Make yourself aware of the location of important fixtures such as water supply valves and emergency equipment, including first aid kits. Determine where “high risk” locations such as vaults, petty cash boxes, filing rooms, or computer server rooms exist. Keep in mind these items may not be considered high risk in all settings (e.g., not all file cabinets contain secure information); your post orders will explain what your priorities should be.

If required, check in with the central dispatch office or your supervisor. Advise them you are on duty at your post and provide any information (e.g., outdated post orders) they may need as well as asking any questions you have regarding the expectations for your shift. Make entries in your notebook as appropriate.
